Text-Based Network Industries and
Endogenous Product Differentiation
Gerard Hoberg
University of Southern California
Gordon Phillips
Dartmouth College and National Bureau of Economic Research
We study how ﬁrms differ from their competitors using new time-varying
measures of product similarity based on text-based analysis of ﬁrm 10-K
product descriptions. This year-by-year set of product similarity mea-
sures allows us to generate a new set of industries in which ﬁrms can
have their own distinct set of competitors. Our new sets of competitors
explain speciﬁc discussion of high competition, rivals identiﬁed by man-
agers as peer ﬁrms, and changes to industry competitors following ex-
ogenous industry shocks. We also ﬁnd evidence that ﬁrm R&D and ad-
vertising are associated with subsequent differentiation from competitors,
consistent with theories of endogenous product differentiation.
I.
Introduction
Deﬁning industry boundaries and industry competitiveness is central to
the study of industrial organization. It is also central to broader disciplines
We especially thank our editor, Sam Kortum, and three anonymous referees. We also
thank Dan Kovenock, Steve Martin, Nagpurnanand Prabhala, John Sutton, and seminar
participants at Aalto (Helsinki) School of Economics, HEC-Paris, Research Institute of In-
dustrial Economics (IFN Stockholm), INSEAD, University Institute of Lisbon, London
Business School, Notre Dame, Northwestern, Stanford, Stockholm School of Economics,
University of Amsterdam, University of Chicago, University of Southern California, Univer-
sity of Vienna, and the Academy of Management meetings for helpful comments. All errors
are ours alone. Data are provided as supplementary material online.
Electronically published August 31, 2016
[ Journal of Political Economy, 2016, vol. 124, no. 5]
© 2016 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0022-3808/2016/12405-0001$10.00
1423

in economics, ﬁnance, and management strategy, where the study of in-
dustries, or the need to control for industry, is pervasive. We develop new
time-varying industry classiﬁcations using text-based analysis of ﬁrm prod-
uct descriptions ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC). Our paper is based on the premise that product similarity is core
to classifying industries and that empirical work can beneﬁt from more
ﬂexible measures of industry membership, product differentiation, and
changes in both as they occur in each year. We use these new industries
to show how industries and their competitors change both in competi-
tive intensity and in product offerings following industry shocks. We also
show that ﬁrm research and development (R&D) and advertising are as-
sociated with subsequent differentiation from competitors and increased
proﬁtability.
Our starting point is to gather business descriptions from 50,673 ﬁrm
annual 10-Ks ﬁled with the SEC using web crawling algorithms. We pro-
cess the text in these business descriptions to form new industry classiﬁ-
cations based on the strong tendency of product market vocabulary to
cluster among ﬁrms operating in the same market. Because they are a
function of 10-K business descriptions, our classiﬁcations are based on
the products that ﬁrms supply to the market rather than production pro-
cesses (as is the case for existing industry classiﬁcation schemes).1 Using
the traditional industry groups, ﬁrms are placed within predeﬁned in-
dustry groups instead of using the information that ﬁrms provide to de-
termine whom they compete against. To identify related ﬁrms, our meth-
ods use the business description section of the 10-K, where ﬁrms give
detail on the products they offer. In particular, the business description
section of the 10-K is mandated by SEC regulations requiring ﬁrms to de-
scribe the signiﬁcant products they offer to their customers. Our new clas-
siﬁcations are thus based on the products sold by ﬁrms that arise from un-
derlying consumer preferences and demand.
There are two central ideas in our paper. The ﬁrst is that 10-K product
words describe the features and bundles of products each ﬁrm offers.
Thus, we use the text in each ﬁrm’s 10-K business description to assign
each ﬁrm a spatial location based on product words, generating a Hotelling-
like product location space for publicly traded US ﬁrms.2 Each ﬁrm has a
1 See the website for the North American Industry Classiﬁcation System (http://www
.naics.com/info.htm). The Census Department states, “NAICS was developed to classify
units according to their production function. NAICS results in industries that group units
undertaking similar activities using similar resources but does not necessarily group all sim-
ilar products or outputs.”
2 Hotelling (1929) and Chamberlin (1933) famously show that product differentiation
is fundamental to proﬁtability and theories of industrial organization, and also that prod-
uct markets can be viewed as having a spatial representation that accounts for product dif-
ferentiation. Empirically, the spatial characteristics of our measures can also be viewed as
1424
journal of political economy

unique spatial location and its own potential set of nearby competitors
in this space based on product word overlaps. Groups of likely competi-
torsarethuslocatedinclustersinspaceanalogoustocitiesonamap.Larger
distances within a cluster indicate product differentiation, and distances
across clusters indicate across-industry similarity.
The second central idea relates to networks, as we calculate how sim-
ilar each ﬁrm is to every other ﬁrm by calculating ﬁrm-by-ﬁrm pairwise
word similarity scores using the 10-K product words. We thus reduce high-
dimensional word vectors to a simple matrix of ﬁrm pairwise similarity
scores. Using these pairwise similarity scores, we then group ﬁrms into in-
dustries. Our general industry classiﬁcation can then be represented as
an unrestricted network of ﬁrms. Because ﬁrms update their 10-Ks, the
network is time varying. In this network, a ﬁrm’s competitors are analo-
gous to a Facebook circle of friends, where each ﬁrm can have its own dis-
tinct set of competitors. Because each ﬁrm pair has a continuous degree
of relatedness, the analogy is that some pairs are close friends and some
pairs are more distant acquaintances.
What makes our analysis possible is that publicly traded ﬁrms must
ﬁle a 10-K in each year, allowing us to build classiﬁcations that change
over time. Using this time-varying feature, we examine how ﬁrms react
to changes within and around their product markets over time.3 For ex-
ample, we assess the extent to which ﬁrms adjust product offerings fol-
lowing large industry shocks. Although numerous studies use industry
classiﬁcations as control variables, only a few studies examine the classi-
ﬁcation schemes themselves, and these do not consider the possibility of
industry classiﬁcations that change materially over time.4
We create 10-K-based industry classiﬁcations using two methods: one
historically motivated and one that allows industry competition to be ﬁrm-
centric and change over time. The ﬁrst, which we name ﬁxed industry clas-
siﬁcations, is analogous to SIC and NAICS industries. Firms are grouped
together using ﬁxed product market deﬁnitions, and industry member-
ship is constrained to be transitive. Therefore, this method requires that
if ﬁrms B and C are in ﬁrm A’s industry, then ﬁrms B and C are also in the
analogous to the patent technology–based space of Jaffe (1986), although Jaffe’s space is
applicable for patent ﬁling ﬁrms and is not generated using product description text.
3 Note that only publicly traded ﬁrms ﬁle 10-Ks. However, the methods can be applied to
a broader set of product descriptions using ﬁrm Internet webpages.
4 Kahle and Walkling (1996) compare the informativeness of Standard Industrial Clas-
siﬁcation (SIC) codes obtained from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP)
and Compustat databases, and Fama and French (1997) create new industry classiﬁcations
based on a new way of grouping existing four-digit SIC codes. Krishnan and Press (2003)
compare SIC codes to NAICS codes, and Bhojraj, Lee, and Oler (2003) also compare var-
ious ﬁxed industry classiﬁcations. Although these studies are informative and suggest that
existing static classiﬁcations can be used in better ways, they do not explore whether the
core methodology underlying static classiﬁcations can be improved.
text-based network industries
1425

same industry. To implement this method, we assign ﬁrms to industries
using a clustering algorithm that maximizes total within-industry similar-
ity based on word usage in 10-K product descriptions.
Our second, more general, network classiﬁcation is unconstrained. We
now allow product market deﬁnitions to change every year, and we relax
the membership transitivity requirement of ﬁxed industry classiﬁcations.
We thus view industries as time-varying intransitive networks. We name
these new industries text-based network industry classiﬁcations or TNIC on our
external website, where we maintain the data.5 In this classiﬁcation sys-
tem, each ﬁrm has its own set of distinct competitors. To illustrate why tran-
sitivity is restrictive, suppose that ﬁrms A and B both view ﬁrm C as a rival.
If A and B each have products with different distinct features or enhance-
ments that C does not have, then A and B may not compete against each
other as they may serve different product segments.
Relative to existing industry classiﬁcations, our text-based classiﬁca-
tions offer economically large improvements in their ability to explain
differences in key characteristics such as proﬁtability, sales growth, and
market risk across industries. They also better explain the extent to which
managers mention high competition in the Management’s Discussion and
Analysis section of the 10-K, the speciﬁc ﬁrms mentioned by managers
as being competitors, and how advertising and R&D investments relate
to future product differentiation. Our empirical tests beneﬁt from in-
formation regarding the degree to which speciﬁc ﬁrms are similar to their
competitors and how this changes over time, neither of which can be
derived from static zero-one membership classiﬁcations such as SIC or
NAICS.6
Using our ability to identify both the time-varying product market lo-
cation of a ﬁrm and the time-varying identity of its rivals, we examine how
these items change following large exogenous industry shocks. We focus
on the September 11, 2001, shock to the military goods and services in-
dustry and also on the post-2000 collapse of the software industry. Follow-
ing these exogenous shocks, our new industry classiﬁcations capture sig-
niﬁcant changes in the membership of each ﬁrm’s rivals, the degree of
product similarity, and also the nature and type of products offered.
Our results suggest that a positive shock to the military industry led to in-
creases in competition and increases in product market similarity as rivals
relocated in the product market space to areas of common high demand.
In contrast, a negative industry shock in the software industry led to re-
5 Our new industry network groupings and underlying data are available for download
at http://hobergphillips.usc.edu.
6 Our results are robust to the treatment of ﬁrms that report producing in more than
one industry (conglomerate ﬁrms). When forming ﬁxed classiﬁcations, we use only ﬁrms
that report just one segment to identify which industries exist in the economy. Thereafter,
we assign conglomerates and nonconglomerates alike to the resulting classiﬁcations.
1426
journal of political economy

ductions in similarity and movement toward more differentiated prod-
ucts.
We also examine whether advertising and R&D are correlated with de-
creasing ex post product similarity. We ﬁnd that ﬁrms spending more on
either advertising or R&D experience signiﬁcant reductions in measures
of ex post similarity and signiﬁcant gains in ex post proﬁtability. These
ﬁndings are consistent with Sutton’s (1991) hypothesis that ﬁrms spend
on advertising and R&D to differentiate themselves and create endoge-
nous barriers to entry. Our results provide evidence across a broad range
of industries complementing the study by Ellickson (2007), who analyzes
endogenous barriers to entry in the supermarket industry.7
One of the beneﬁts of our approach is that it allows both within-industry
and across-industry relations to be examined. Many empirical studies ex-
amining product differentiation focus on single industries, while an older
literature summarized by Schmalensee (1989) focuses on cross-industry
relations.8 We are able to identify a unique set of industry rivals surround-
ing each ﬁrm over time as in the circular city model of Chamberlin (1933),
which relaxes the restrictive transitivity property of existing classiﬁcations.
We also identify groups of other ﬁrms that share some vocabulary sim-
ilar to that of the initial group of ﬁrms, thus capturing across-industry
relatedness.
Although it is convenient to use existing industry classiﬁcations such
as SIC or NAICS for research purposes, these measures have at least four
limitations. First, neither reclassiﬁes ﬁrms signiﬁcantly over time as the
product market evolves. Second, neither can easily accommodate inno-
vations that create entirely new product markets. In the late 1990s, hun-
dreds of new technology and web-based ﬁrms were grouped into a large
and nondescript SIC-based “business services” industry. Third, SIC and
NAICS impose transitivity even though two ﬁrms that are rivals to a third
ﬁrm might not be rivals. Finally, they do not provide continuous mea-
sures of similarity both within and across industries. There are also econo-
metric beneﬁts to using our new industries as they are more informative
in tests of external validity that we conduct in this paper.
Our new classiﬁcations can also be used in conjunction with, not in
lieu of, other data. Although not part of the current study, word-by-word
mappings can be used to create ﬁrm-speciﬁc aggregations of Bureau of
Labor Statistics price series, Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) input-
output data, and patent data. For example, patent ﬁlings have a textual
7 We note that while our new measures are interesting for research or scientiﬁc pur-
poses, e.g., to examine innovation, shocks, or industry life cycles, they are less useful for
policy and antitrust purposes as they could be manipulated by ﬁrms if they believed they
were being used for this purpose.
8 For recent examples of single-industry studies, see Nevo (2000), Mazzeo (2002), Seim
(2006), and Gowrisankaran and Rysman (2012).
text-based network industries
1427

description, and this can be used to map how patents are related to each
other and across ﬁrms—independent of the patent examiner classiﬁca-
tion. Analogously, if price data are available for verbal product lists, ﬁrm-
speciﬁc price levels can also be estimated using various weighting meth-
ods based on ﬁrm 10-K text.
Our research contributes to existing strands of literature using text anal-
ysis to address economic and ﬁnancial theories, product markets, and
mergers and acquisitions. Hoberg and Phillips (2010) show that merging
ﬁrms with more similar product descriptions in their 10-Ks experience
more successful outcomes. Hanley and Hoberg (2010) use document sim-
ilarity measures to examine prospectus disclosures from the SEC Edgar
website to address theories of initial public offering pricing. In other con-
texts, Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010) measure the Republican versus Dem-
ocratic slant of US daily newspapers and document a preference among
readers for like-minded news. Papers such as Antweiler and Frank (2004),
Tetlock(2007),Tetlock,Saar-Tsechanksy,andMacskassy(2008),andLough-
ran and McDonald (2011) examine the tone of various documents and
link them, for example, to stock price movements.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We describe the
verbal data and similarity calculations in Section II. We give methodolog-
ical details for our new industry classiﬁcations in Section III. We discuss
central properties of new industry classiﬁcations and give new industry ex-
amples in Section IV. In Section V we examine the external validation of
our new industry classiﬁcations. Section VI examines how industry simi-
larity and competitors change over time following large exogenous indus-
try shocks. Section VII tests theories of endogenous barriers to entry and
examines how R&D and advertising are associated with subsequent changes
in similarity and proﬁtability. Section VIII presents conclusions.
II.
Objective and Methodology: From Words
to Industry Classiﬁcations
Our industry classiﬁcations are based on the notion that ﬁrms in the
same industry use many of the same words to identify and describe their
products. In this section, we describe our objective in building new mea-
sures of industry relatedness. We also describe the underlying data struc-
tures that deﬁne our new industries.
A.
Objective
Our overall objective is to capture the relatedness of ﬁrms based on their
product offerings to customers using a ﬂexible network approach. This
approach provides a measure of distance between ﬁrm pairs in product
space and does not impose transitivity between members of the network.
1428
journal of political economy

Our approach identiﬁes competitors of each ﬁrm on the basis of the sim-
ilarity of their product offerings. Competitors can be different for each
ﬁrm—even when ﬁrms may share some overlapping competitors. Thus an
industry can be thought of as a cluster in a network with porous bound-
aries. This more general classiﬁcation of industries can be used to test a
larger set of economic hypotheses (see Sec. IV).
Our objective differs from that of traditional SIC or NAICS industry
classiﬁcations, which is to place ﬁrms in predeﬁned industry categories
on the basis of production processes, not the products they offer to cus-
tomers (http://www.naics.com/info.htm). SIC and NAICS industries also
impose transitivity among group members and provide no measure of sim-
ilarity between ﬁrms within an industry or between ﬁrms in neighboring
industries.
Our methods come closer to capturing the fact that cross-price elastic-
ities of demand between ﬁrms may be different for different pairs of
ﬁrms within the same industry. In many industry studies in industrial or-
ganization, researchers obtain detailed price and quantity data in order
to measure these intraindustry cross-price elasticities. Our classiﬁcations
provide measures of distance for all ﬁrm pairs simultaneously without
having to obtain detailed price and quantity data—which for many com-
petitors with differentiated products can be difﬁcult to obtain.
A second major part of our objective is to allow for frequent annual
updating. Our industries are updated every year as ﬁrm product offerings
change. In contrast, ﬁrm SIC and NAICS codes update infrequently de-
spite the fact that ﬁrm products change materially over time, as can be seen
in their 10-Ks.
The last part of our objective is to uniquely capture horizontal related-
ness between ﬁrms, not vertical relatedness. As we describe later in the
paper, we thus remove pairs from our related pairs that are in two differ-
ent traditional industries classiﬁed as shipping to each other using the
input-output tables of the BEA. The pairs we remove turn out to be rel-
atively scarce, representing just 4 percent of the pairs in our data. We thus
conclude that our methods naturally capture horizontally related prod-
uct offerings and not vertical links or vertical production processes.
B.
Capturing Relatedness between Firms
Our primary building block is the set of unique words that ﬁrms use to
describe their products in their business description sections from 10-K
annual ﬁlings on the SEC Edgar website from 1996 to 2008. These de-
scriptions are found in a separate section of each 10-K ﬁled by each ﬁrm.
The 10-K business descriptions are legally required to be accurate, as
item 101 of Regulation S-K requires that ﬁrms describe the signiﬁcant
products they offer to the market. These descriptions must also be up-
text-based network industries
1429

dated and be representative of the current ﬁscal year of the 10-K. This re-
cency requirement is important, as our goal is to measure how industries
change over time.
We use the 10-K business descriptions to compute pairwise word sim-
ilarity scores for each pair of ﬁrms in a given year. In our main speciﬁca-
tion, we limit attention to nouns (deﬁned by Webster.com) and proper
nouns that appear in no more than 25 percent of all product descriptions
in order to avoid common words.9 We deﬁne proper nouns as words that
appear with the ﬁrst letter capitalized at least 90 percent of the time in our
sample of 10-Ks. We also omit common words that are used by more than
25 percent of all ﬁrms, and we omit geographical words including coun-
try and state names, as well as the names of the top 50 cities in the United
States and in the world. As we discuss later, our results are robust to alter-
ing these stop word thresholds.
Figure 1 displays a histogram showing the number of unique words in
ﬁrm product descriptions. Typical ﬁrms use roughly 200 unique words.
The tail is also somewhat skewed, as some ﬁrms use as many as 500–
1,000 words, although some use fewer than 50. Because they are not
likely to be informative, we exclude ﬁrms having fewer than 20 unique
words from our classiﬁcation algorithm.
We map ﬁrms into industries using word vectors and ﬁrm pairwise co-
sine similarity scores based on the words used by each ﬁrm. Full details
regarding our implementation of the cosine similarity calculation are in
Appendix A. We give a basic description here. Suppose that there areW
unique words used in the union of the documents used by all ﬁrms in
our sample. In our sample, W is 61,146 unique nouns and proper nouns
in 1996 and 55,605 in 2008. A given ﬁrm i’s vocabulary can then be rep-
resented by a W-vector Pi, with each element being populated by the num-
ber 1 if ﬁrm i uses the given word and 0 if it does not. We then normal-
ize each vector to have unit length as follows:
Vi 5
Pi
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Pi  Pi
p
8 i, j:
(1)
Given that each vector has dimension W, and because we normalize these
vectors to have unit length, all ﬁrms in a given year thus reside in a space
shaped as the surface of a W-dimensional unit sphere. We deﬁne Q t as the
matrix containing the set of normalized vectors Vi for all ﬁrms i in year t.
Thus Qt is an Nt W matrix, where Nt is the number of ﬁrms in year t. Each
row i of Qt contains the normalized vector Vi deﬁned above for ﬁrm i in
9 When a word can be used as more than one part of speech, we include the word in our
universe if it has at least one use as a noun.
1430
journal of political economy

FIG. 1.—Frequency distribution of unique non–common noun and proper noun words in 10-K product descriptions. Color version available as an
online enhancement.

year t. Thus Qt is a complete description of the ﬁrm-to-word spatial repre-
sentation of ﬁrms in product space over time.
In order to derive the ﬁrm-to-ﬁrm network representation of our indus-
tries, we use the vectors Vi and Vj for a pair of ﬁrms i and j to calculate the
product cosine similarity or the ﬁrm pairwise similarity score as follows:
Product Cosine Similarityi,j 5 ðVi VjÞ:
(2)
The network representation of ﬁrms is fully described by an Nt  Nt
square matrix Mt (i.e., a network), where an entry of this matrix for
row i and column j is the Product Cosine Similarityi,j for ﬁrms i and j de-
ﬁned above. The large number of words used in business descriptions
ensures that the matrix Mt is not sparse and that its entries are unrestricted
real numbers in the interval [0, 1]. Because ﬁrms update their 10-Ks an-
nually, Mt is time varying.
Intuitively, the cosine similarity is higher when ﬁrms i and j use more
of the same words, as both vectors will then have positive values in the
same elements. Because we populate Pi with binary values, our baseline
method weights words equally regardless of their frequency.10
We use the “cosine similarity” method for many reasons (see Sebastiani
[2002] for a detailed review of related methods). First, its properties are
well understood given its wide usage in studies of information processing,
and it is also intuitive given its network and spatial representations. This
method is only moderately computationally burdensome, making it prac-
tical to replicate or extend. Finally, this method’s normalization builds
in a natural control for document length. It is called cosine similarity be-
cause it measures the angle between two word vectors on a unit sphere.
III.
Industry Classiﬁcation Methods and Firm 10-Ks
We construct network industry classiﬁcations using the matrix of ﬁrm
pairwise cosine similarity scores (Mt) as the basic building block. We con-
sider two methods. First, we consider a ﬁxed industry classiﬁcation method
in which we impose transitivity on ﬁrm membership such that if ﬁrm A
and ﬁrm C are in the same industry as ﬁrm B, then ﬁrms A and C are in
the same industry. Second, we relax transitivity and allow ﬁrms to have dif-
ferent sets of competitors.
10 Following Loughran and McDonald (2011), we also consider an alternative weight-
ing scheme called “total frequency/inverse document frequency” (TF-IDF) in which the Pi vec-
tor is instead populated with higher weights for more frequently used words in ﬁrm i’s own
document and lower weights for words used by a larger fraction of all ﬁrms in the economy.
Our results suggest that uniform weights outperform TF-IDF weights for our application, in-
dicating that a ﬁrm’s use of a given word to describe its products is more important than how
frequently the word is used.
1432
journal of political economy

The large number of words used in business descriptions, along with
the continuous and bounded properties of the cosine similarity method,
ensure that the matrix Mt is not sparse and that its entries are real num-
bers in the interval [0, 1]. In contrast, the analogous matrix Mt underly-
ing SIC and NAICS industries is heavily “restricted” and must satisfy the
following two properties.
Deﬁnition 1.
A classiﬁcation is said to satisfy the binary membership
transitivity property if Mt has a binary banded diagonal form (1 on all
banded diagonals and 0 elsewhere). This implies that for any two ﬁrms
A and B in the same industry, a ﬁrm C that is in A’s industry is also in B’s
industry. This form also requires that all ﬁrms are homogeneous within
industries and that all industries are entirely unrelated to one another.
Deﬁnition 2.
A classiﬁcation is said to have the ﬁxed location property
if Mt is not updated each year. Intuitively, such industries have a time-ﬁxed
product market (they are ﬁxed until the codes are changed or updated).
Our ﬁrst method, described in Section B below, is analogous to SIC and
NAICS classiﬁcations and requires both the binary membership transitiv-
ity and the ﬁxed location properties to hold. We refer to classiﬁcations re-
quiring these two restrictive properties as “ﬁxed industry classiﬁcations.”
Our second method, described in Section C below, relaxes both prop-
erties. We refer to this class of industries as “text-based network industry
classiﬁcations.” Both ﬁrms and entire industries can move in the product
space over time as technologies and product tastes evolve. New ﬁrms can
appear in the sample, and each ﬁrm can have its own distinct set of com-
petitors. Finally, these industries are sufﬁciently rich to permit within- and
across-industry similarities to be computed.
A.
The Sample of 10-Ks and the Business Descriptions
We electronically gather 10-Ks by searching the Edgar database for ﬁl-
ings that appear as “10-K,” “10-K405,” “10KSB,” or “10KSB40.” Our pri-
mary sample includes ﬁlings associated with ﬁrm ﬁscal years ending in
calendar years 1997–2008. Our sample begins in 1997 as this is when elec-
tronic ﬁling with Edgar ﬁrst became required. We link 10-K data from Ed-
gar to Compustat using the unique SEC ﬁrm identiﬁer, the central index
key, and the Compustat gvkey. Among ﬁrm-year observations with ﬁscal
years ending in 1997–2008 that are present in both CRSP and Compustat
(domestic ﬁrms traded on either the New York Stock Exchange, American
Stock Exchange, or NASDAQ), we have 10-K coverage for 97.9 percent of
the CRSP/Compustat sample.11 We can also report that our database is well
11 We thank the Wharton Research Data Service for providing us with an expanded his-
torical mapping from the ﬁrm-level central index key (used by the SEC) to the Compustat
gvkey. We also compute similarities for 1996 (93.5 percent coverage; electronic ﬁling was
optional) but only use the 1996 data to compute the starting value of lagged variables. Also,
text-based network industries
1433

balanced over time, as we capture between 97.4 percent and 98.3 percent
in all years of our primary sample from 1997 to 2008. Because database
selection can be determined using ex ante information (i.e., the 10-K it-
self), we do not believe that our data requirements indicate any bias.
Our full sample of 10-Ks from 1997–2008 comprises 68,302 observa-
tions; this declines to 63,875 when we exclude ﬁrms without valid Com-
pustat data, ﬁrms with nonpositive sales, or ﬁrms with assets of less than
$1 million. This declines further to 50,673 if we additionally require 1 year
of lagged Compustat data and exclude ﬁnancial ﬁrms (SIC codes in the
range 6000–6999).
From each linked 10-K, our goal is to extract its business description.
This section of the document appears as item 1 or item 1A in most 10-Ks.
We utilize a combination of Perl web crawling scripts, APL program-
ming, and human intervention (when documents are nonstandard) to
extract and summarize this section. The web crawling algorithm scans
the Edgar website and collects the entire text of each 10-K annual report,
and the APL text reading algorithms then process each document and
extract each one’s product description and its central index key. This lat-
ter process is extensively supported by human intervention when non-
standard document formats are encountered. This method is reliable,
and we encountered only a small number of ﬁrms (roughly 100) that
we were not able to process because they did not contain a valid product
description or because the product description had fewer than 1,000 char-
acters. These ﬁrms are excluded from our analysis.
As described earlier, we then parse the words in the business descrip-
tion and exclude common words and words that are not nouns or proper
nouns. Using the resulting word vectors for each ﬁrm, we then form the
matrix of pairwise similarity scores for the ﬁrms in our sample in each year
(Mt) as described in the last section.
B.
Fixed Industry Classiﬁcations Based on 10-Ks
To maintain consistency with other ﬁxed classiﬁcations such as SIC and
NAICS, we form 10-K-based ﬁxed industries by running a clustering algo-
rithm only once using the earliest year of our sample (1997), and we
then hold these industries ﬁxed throughout our sample. We assign ﬁrms
to these industries in later years on the basis of their 10-K text similarity
relative to the frequency-weighted list of words used in the 1997 10-K
product descriptions that were initially assigned to each industry.
although we use data for ﬁscal year endings through 2008, we extract documents ﬁled
through December 2009, as many of the ﬁlings in 2009 are associated with ﬁscal years end-
ing in 2008. The reason is that 10-Ks are generally ﬁled during the 3-month window after
the ﬁscal year ends.
1434
journal of political economy

We also consider a variation in which we rerun the clustering algo-
rithm in each year, as this variation imposes the binary membership tran-
sitivity property but relaxes the ﬁxed location property. This allows us to
examine the relative economic impact of the two properties separately,
and we report later that both properties are about equally important in
explaining the difference in explanatory power between our ﬁxed indus-
try classiﬁcation and our more general textual network industries.
We provide a detailed description of the text clustering algorithm used
to create our ﬁxed industry classiﬁcations in Appendix B. The main idea
is that the clustering algorithm starts by assuming that each of the roughly
5,000 ﬁrms in 1997 is a separate industry, and then it groups the most sim-
ilar ﬁrms into industries one at a time. The algorithm stops when the de-
sired number of industries remains.
A positive feature of the clustering algorithm is that it can generate
a classiﬁcation with any number of industries. We consider industry clas-
siﬁcations comprising 50–800 industries in increments of 50. However,
we focus on the 300 industries classiﬁcation as it is most analogous to pop-
ular alternatives including three-digit SIC codes and four-digit NAICS
codes, which have 274 and 331 industries, respectively, in our sample. Al-
though the algorithm’s ﬂexibility to prespecify the number of industries
is a positive feature, it is not capable of determining the “optimal” num-
ber of industries. In Appendix C, we explore this question using Akaike
information criterion tests. These tests use likelihood analysis to compare
models even when they use varying numbers of parameters (in our case
industries). The results suggest that roughly 300–400 industries best ex-
plain ﬁrm-level data.
Figure 2 displays a histogram showing the distribution of the number of
ﬁrms in each industry for 10-K-based 300 industries, SIC-3, and NAICS-4
industries. Ten-K-based industries (top graph) have ﬁrm counts that are
similar to those based on SIC-3 (second graph) and to NAICS-4 industries
(bottom graph), as most industries have fewer than 10 ﬁrms. However,
they are somewhat different in two ways. First, 10-K groupings have more
single-ﬁrm industries, given that some ﬁrms have highly unique descrip-
tions. Second, 10-K classiﬁcations have more very large industries and
are more spread out.
Industry memberships have roughly one-half to two-thirds overlap.
For example (not displayed), the likelihood that two ﬁrms in the same
SIC-3 industry will also be in the same NAICS-4 industry is 61.3 percent.
The likelihood that they will be in the same 10-K-based industry is a more
modest 46.2 percent. In contrast, when two ﬁrms are in the same 10-K-
based industry, the likelihood that they will appear in the same SIC-3 and
NAICS-4 industry is 44.1 percent and 54.2 percent, respectively. We con-
clude that 10-K-based industries are quite distinct from both NAICS-4
and SIC-3.
text-based network industries
1435

FIG. 2.—Frequency distribution of the number of ﬁrms in each industry based on three ﬁxed industry classiﬁcation methods: 10-K-based 300 industries,
three-digit SIC industries, and four-digit NAICS industries. All three classiﬁcations have close to 300 industries in our sample. Color version available as an
online enhancement.

C.
10-K-Based Textual Network Industry Classiﬁcations
We next relax the ﬁxed location and transitivity requirements and con-
struct text-based network industry classiﬁcations. We use a simple mini-
mum similarity threshold and deﬁne each ﬁrm i’s industry to include all
ﬁrms j with pairwise cosine similarities relative to i above a prespeciﬁed
minimum threshold. A high threshold will result in industries having very
few rival ﬁrms, and a low threshold results in very large industries.
For two randomly selected ﬁrms i and j, we label them as a “membership
pair” if, for a given classiﬁcation, they are in the same industry. Where
N denotes the number of ﬁrms in the economy, there are ðN 2 2 N Þ=2 per-
mutations of unique pairs.12 In practice, however, only a small fraction
of pairs are actually membership pairs. Although one can use any mini-
mum similarity threshold to construct a classiﬁcation, we focus on thresh-
olds generating industries with the same fraction of membership pairs
as SIC-3 industries, allowing us to compare our industries to SIC-3 in an
unbiased fashion.
For three-digit SIC codes, 2.05 percent of all possible ﬁrm pairs are
membership pairs. A 21.32 percent minimum similarity threshold (where
we deﬁne ﬁrms i and j as being in the same industry when 100 ⋅Vi ⋅Vj >
21.32) generates 10-K-based industries with 2.05 percent membership
pairs, which is the same as SIC-3. We consider one further reﬁnement
to further mitigate the impact of document length. For a ﬁrm i we com-
pute its median score as the median similarity between ﬁrm i and all other
ﬁrms in the economy in the given year. Intuitively, because no industry
is large enough to span the entire economy, this quantity should be cali-
brated to be near zero. We achieve this by subtracting these median scores
from the raw scores to obtain our ﬁnal scores used for each ﬁrm.13
Note that the transitivity property does not hold for these ﬁrm-centric
industries. For example, consider ﬁrms A and B, which are 25 percent sim-
ilar. Because this is higher than 21.32 percent, A and B are in each other’s
industry. Now consider a ﬁrm C that is 27 percent similar to ﬁrm A and
17 percent similar to ﬁrm B. Firm C is in ﬁrm A’s industry but not in ﬁrm B’s
industry, and thus transitivity does not hold.
We also take into account vertical relatedness in deﬁning our variable in-
dustry classiﬁcations. We examine the extent to which ﬁrm pairings are ver-
tically related using the methodology described in Fan and Goyal (2006).
On the basis of the four-digit SIC codes, we use the use table of the Bench-
mark Input-Output Accounts of the US Economy to compute, for each
ﬁrm pairing, the fraction of inputs that ﬂow between the industries of
each pair. If this fraction exceeds 1 percent of all inputs, we exclude the
12 For a sample of 5,000 ﬁrms, this is 12.4975 million unique pairs.
13 Our results are robust, although our external validation tests are slightly weaker if we
omit this step.
text-based network industries
1437

pairing from our network industries regardless of the similarity score. Be-
cause just 4 percent of all pairs are excluded using this screen and because
our results are robust to including or excluding this screen, we conclude
that ﬁrm business descriptions in ﬁrm 10-Ks indeed focus heavily on hori-
zontal ﬁrm product offerings, and not on vertical ﬁrm production inputs.
IV.
Qualitative Assessment of Our New
Industry Classiﬁcations
In this section we discuss central properties of our “unrestricted” text-
based network industry classiﬁcation and illustrate these properties us-
ing sample industries based on the new classiﬁcations. We focus on
properties of networks that are not captured by traditional ﬁxed indus-
try classiﬁcations. The properties are (1) capturing within-industry het-
erogeneity, (2) capturing product and industry change, and (3) captur-
ing cross-industry relatedness.
A.
Capturing Within-Industry Heterogeneity
The concept of product differentiation within industries dates back to
Chamberlin (1933), who famously showed that differentiation is fun-
damental to theories of industrial organization and reduces competition
between ﬁrms. An informative classiﬁcation should not only identify prod-
uct markets but also measure differentiation within industries. Begin-
ning with Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1997), who consider the automo-
bile industry, the approach in the product differentiation literature has
been to estimate demand and cost parameters in well-deﬁned product
markets. For example, Nevo (2000) estimates own- and cross-price elastici-
ties of demand and their effect on postmerger prices in the ready-to-eat
cereal market. Gowrisankaran and Rysman (2012) consider a dynamic set-
ting and examine the effect of transitory price shocks on 1-month and
1-year price elasticities. Holmes and Stevens (2004) show that industries
are not as homogeneous as standard classiﬁcations might suggest, as
smaller and larger ﬁrms might specialize or exhibit different degrees of
differentiation.
These latter studies motivate the need for more reﬁned industry clas-
siﬁcations offering the ﬂexibility to assess industries in a dynamic way or
to assess the distribution of rivals using multiple degrees of granularity.
Text-based network industries address both issues. The standard single-
industry approach used in the literature has been highly informative,
especially in understanding the dynamics of industry pricing, competi-
tion, and substitution in well-deﬁned industries.14 However, many theo-
14 For additional recent examples, see Mazzeo (2002) and Seim (2006).
1438
journal of political economy

ries, especially those related to endogenous barriers to entry and multi-
ple industry production, are difﬁcult to test in a single industry setting.
Accurately specifying industry composition is especially difﬁcult in in-
dustries in which ﬁrms offer highly differentiated products or services.
This difﬁculty is readily apparent in the business services industry, SIC
code 737. There were over 600 publicly traded ﬁrms in this industry in
1997 according to Compustat. Using a classiﬁcation that matches the
coarseness of three-digit SIC industries, we ﬁnd that the markets faced
by these ﬁrms are quite different. Table 1 displays sample classiﬁcations
using our methodology for selected ﬁrms in this product area.
Table 1 shows six major submarkets within this broad business ser-
vices industry: entertainment, medical services, information transmis-
sion, software, corporate data management and computing solutions,
and online retailing and publishing. Each subindustry is the text-based
network industry surrounding the focal ﬁrm listed in each example’s
header. Although SIC codes were not used to make these groupings,
we report them for illustrative purposes. The SIC codes in each market
load heavily on 737, but each submarket also spans ﬁrms in other SIC
industries including the three-digit codes 357, 366, and 382. A theme
is that many ﬁrms address these markets using the Internet, but they of-
ten also compete with rivals having a more traditional brick-and-mortar
presence.
Beyond simply identifying industry clusters, our approach also gener-
ates ﬁrm-by-ﬁrm pairwise relatedness scores. Therefore, our framework
can order rivals in terms of their importance to a focal ﬁrm, analogous to
a network, while also providing aggregated measures of overall product
differentiation surrounding each ﬁrm. We examine measures of compe-
tition in Section V.
B.
Ability to Capture Product and Industry Change
An informative industry classiﬁcation should also capture changes to in-
dustry groupings over time. Firms introduce and discontinue products
over time and thus enter and exit various industry spaces. This ﬂexibility
is directly related to the studies by Shaked and Sutton (1987) and Sutton
(1991), who suggest that barriers to entry are endogenous. In particular,
advertising and R&D allow ﬁrms to differentiate their products and en-
ter into related industries.15 These theories motivate our examination of
advertising and R&D and their links to future changes in industry mem-
bership and competition (see Sec. VII).
15 Lin and Saggi (2002) show that trade-offs related to product differentiation can affect
process innovation and product innovation.
text-based network industries
1439

TABLE 1
10-K-Based Classiﬁcations of Firms in Business Services (SIC-3 5 737)
Submarket 1: Entertainment (Sample Focal Firm: Wanderlust Interactive)
43 rivals: Maxis, Piranha Interactive Publishing, Brilliant Digital Entertainment, Midway
Games, Take Two Interactive Software, THQ, 3DO, New Frontier Media, . . .
SIC codes of rivals: computer programming and data processing [SIC-3 5 737] (24 rivals),
motion picture production and allied services [SIC-3 5 781] (4 rivals), miscellaneous
other (13 rivals)
Core words: entertainment (42), video (42), television (38), royalties (35), internet (34),
content (33), creative (31), promotional (31), copyright (31), game (30), sound (29),
publishing (29), . . .
Submarket 2: Medical Services (Sample Focal Firm: Quadramed Corp.)
66 rivals: IDX Systems, Medicus Systems, Hpr, Simione Central Holdings, National Wireless
Holdings, HCIA, Apache Medical Systems, . . .
SIC codes of rivals: computer programming and data processing [SIC-3 5 737] (45 rivals),
insurance agents, brokers, and service [SIC-3 5 641] (5 rivals), miscellaneous health
services [SIC-3 5 809] (4 rivals), management and public relations services [SIC-3 5
874] (3 rivals), miscellaneous other (9 rivals)
Core words: client (59), database (54), solution (49), patient (47), copyright (47), secret
(47), physician (47), hospital (46), health care (46), server (45), resource (44), func-
tionality (44), billing (44), . . .
Submarket 3: Information Transmission (Sample Focal Firm: FAXSAV)
259 rivals: Omtool Ltd., Concentric Network, Premiere Technologies, International Tele-
communication Data Systems, IDT Corp., Axent Technologies, Solopoint, Precision
Systems, Netrix Corp., . . .
SIC codes of rivals: computer programming and data processing [SIC-3 5 737] (112 ri-
vals), communications equipment [SIC-3 5 366] (45 rivals), telephone communications
[SIC-3 5 481] (38 rivals), computer and ofﬁce equipment [SIC-3 5 357] (29 rivals),
communications services, other [SIC-3 5 489] (7 rivals), miscellaneous business services
[SIC-3 5 738] (7 rivals), miscellaneous other (15 rivals)
Core words: internet (236), telecommunications (211), interface (194), communication
(188), solution (187), platform (184), architecture (182), call (177), infrastructure
(173), voice (173), functionality (173), server (173), . . .
Submarket 4: Software (Sample Focal Firm: Intuit)
52 rivals: Netscape Communications, Mysoftware, Quarterdeck, Software Publishing Corp.,
GO2Net, Meridian Data, Macromedia, Microsoft, CE Software Holdings, . . .
SIC codes of rivals: computer programming and data processing [SIC-3 5 737] (48 rivals),
miscellaneous other (4 rivals)
Core words: internet (52), functionality (48), copyright (48), Microsoft (48), Windows
(46), solution (45), ease (44), secret (43), difﬁculties (41), version (41), infringement
(41), database (41)
Submarket 5: Corporate Data Management and Computing
Solutions (Sample Focal Firm: Hyperion)
207 rivals: Oracle Corp., Fourth Shift Corp., Applix, Timeline, Platinum Technology,
Harbinger Corp., Santa Cruz Operation, Edify Corp., Banyan Systems, . . .
SIC codes of rivals: computer programming and data processing [SIC-3 5 737] (174 ri-
vals), computer and ofﬁce equipment [SIC-3 5 357] (22 rivals), communications
equipment [SIC-3 5 366] (2 rivals), miscellaneous other (15 rivals)
Core words: server (196), client (194), solution (193), enterprise (186), functionality
(185), Windows (183), internet (182), copyright (180), Microsoft (177), database (174),
architecture (171), interface (168)

Only industry classiﬁcations that frequently recompute product market
relatedness can address the changing nature of the product market. Some
product areas disappear or change, such as the use of mainframes and
work stations in the software industry (see Sec. VI). More common, as a re-
sult of innovation, new product markets such as solar power or Internet-
based products can appear. Our industry classiﬁcations are updatedannu-
ally and can capture rapidly changing product markets. Table 2 provides
examples of two industries that changed dramatically over time.
Panel A of table 2 displays the text-based network industry surround-
ing Real Goods Trading Corporation, which provides solar technology.
In 1997, this market was nascent, and Real Goods had just one rival,
Photocomm. By 2008, Real Goods was part of a nine-ﬁrm industry group,
having a product vocabulary rooted in solar and environmental termi-
nology. Panel B displays the product market surrounding L-1 Identity
Solutions in 2008, which provides technological intelligence solutions
related to homeland security. This entire product market was not in
our sample in 1997 and likely emerged after the events of September 11,
2001. The only related ﬁrm that was in our sample in 1997, CACI Inter-
national, migrated from the database management product market to
this security-oriented market, as shown in the table.
Our ability to assess product market change is also important in our
examination of exogenous shocks to the military and software indus-
tries. In Section VI, we examine not only changes in the degree of com-
petition and in industry membership but also changes in the type and
features of products offered following the shock.
C.
Ability to Capture Cross-Industry Relatedness
An informative industry classiﬁcation should also be able to capture
across-industry relatedness. If two product markets are very similar,
TABLE 1 (Continued)
Submarket 6: Retail (Sample Focal Firm: Amazon.com Inc.)
87 rivals: Preview Travel, Yahoo, Datamark Holding, Netscape Communications Corp.,
Wall Data, Onsale, Infoseek Corp., Ivi Publishing, Castelle, Connect, New Era Of
Networks, V One Corp., . . .
SIC codes of rivals: computer programming and data processing [SIC-3 5 737] (66 rivals),
computer and ofﬁce equipment [SIC-3 5 357] (5 rivals), nonstore retailers [SIC-3 5
596] (5 rivals), communications equipment [SIC-3 5 366] (4 rivals), miscellaneous
other (14 rivals)
Core words: internet (84), functionality (79), copyright (78), database (77), inability (74),
server (74), client (73), infringement (73), secret (72), solution (70), introductions
(70), Microsoft (70), . . .
Note.—Sample text-based network industries in the business services industry (SIC
737).
text-based network industries
1441

TABLE 2
Sample Industries That Underwent Changes (Text-Based
Network Classiﬁcations)
A. Industry Surrounding Real Goods Solar in 1997
1 rival: Photocomm Inc. (SIC 5 362)
Core words: array (2), fuel (2), backup (2), electric (2), northern (2), remote (2), voltage
(2), utility (2), consumption (2), grid (2), convert (2), weather (2), wind (2), appliances
(2), Siemens (2), audit (2), electricity (2), battery (2), catalog (2), specialists (2), earth
(2), fossil (2), green (2), sizing (2), inverters (2), Photocomm (2)
Industry Surrounding Real Goods Solar in 2008
9 rivals: Daystar Technologies, Akeena Solar, Evergreen Solar, Ascent Solar Technologies,
Energy Conversion Devices, Sunpower Corp., Power One, First Solar
SIC codes of rivals: electronic components [SIC-3 5 367] (6 rivals), electrical industrial
apparatus [SIC-3 5 362] (1 rival), research and testing services [SIC-3 5 873] (1 rival)
Core words: electric (9), silicon (9), electricity (9), roof (9), integrators (8), grid (8), utility
(8), ﬁlm (8), output (8), semiconductor (8), watt (8), sunlight (8), fuel (7), installations
(7), metal (7), cell (7), incentives (7), . . .
B. Industry Surrounding L-1 Identity Solutions in 2008
5 rivals: Cogent, Widepoint Corp., SRA International, Caci International, Actividentity (All
in SIC-3 5 737). None of these ﬁrms existed as publicly traded ﬁrms in 1997 except for
CACI International. Although CACI existed in 1997, it was in a different line of business
(see below).
Core words: defense (6), architecture (6), homeland (6), capture (6), client (6), military
(5), environments (5), integrators (5), mobile (5), procurement (5), prime (5), tradi-
tionally (5), copyright (5), combine (5), database (5), intelligence (5), budget (5), in-
stitute (5), mission (5), identity (5), integrity (5), Grumman (5), Northrop (5), con-
tractor (4), wireless (4), surveillance (4), privacy (4), procurements (4), cyber (4), . . .
C. Industry Surrounding CACI International in 1997
SIC codes of 60 rivals: computer programming and data processing [SIC-3 5 737] (48 ri-
vals), engineering and architectural [SIC-3 5 871] (2 rivals), personnel supply services
[SIC-3 5 736] (2 rivals), professional and commercial equipment [SIC-3 5 504] (2 ri-
vals), miscellaneous other (6 rivals)
Core words: client (56), server (54), internet (53), solution (51), architecture (51), data-
base (51), enterprise (50), clients (48), databases (48), programming (47), Microsoft
(47), environments (46), productivity (43), copyright (43), secret (43), interface (42),
Windows (42), functionality (40), tool (40), background (39), documentation (39),
intranet (39), . . .
Industry Surrounding CACI International in 2008
SIC codes of 18 rivals: computer programming and data processing [SIC-3 5 737] (8 ri-
vals), search, detection, navigation, guidance, and aeronautical [SIC-3 5 381] (5 rivals),
communications equipment [SIC-3 5 366] (2 rivals), miscellaneous other (3 rivals)
Core words: defense (19), military (18), mission (18), contractor (17), homeland (17),
procurement (17), prime (17), quantity (16), intelligence (16), environments (15),
award (15), budget (14), command (14), architecture (13), spectrum (13), under-
standing (13), warfare (13), surveillance (13), . . .
Note.—Sample text-based network industries that changed dramatically between 1997
and 2008.

ﬁrms in each product market likely hold a credible threat of entry into
the other at low cost. This notion of economies of scope is developed
by Hay (1976) and Panzar and Willig (1981). In particular, ﬁrms facing
this form of cross-industry threat might keep prices low to deter entry.
Currently, existing research examines across-industry relatedness using
coarser levels of SIC or NAICS codes or through the BEA’s input-output
matrix, which is used to measure vertical relations.
Our methodology uncovers numerous links entirely missed using other
classiﬁcations. For example, text-based network similarities reveal that
ﬁrms in the newspaper publishing and printing industry (SIC-3 is 271)
are highly similar to ﬁrms in the radio and broadcasting stations industry
(SIC-3 is 483). This example illustrates the fact that both industries likely
cater to the same customers, who demand advertising, and thus exhibit
at least some substitution. A different ﬁrm-speciﬁc example is the merger
in 2006 of Disney and Pixar. Disney was classiﬁed in the business services
industry (SIC-3 is 737), while Pixar was classiﬁed in the motion pictures
industry (SIC-3 is 781). Movies are produced by both but using different
production methods, explaining in part why they are in different SIC
codes. Our methodology indicates that they are similar and are in the
same text-based network industry.
These examples are interesting given that these ﬁrms have SIC codes
that disagree even at the one- or two-digit level, suggesting that tradi-
tional classiﬁcations treat these industries as entirely unrelated. Because
our classiﬁcations are based on actual product text, we are able to detect
potential rival ﬁrms that offer related products even if they are not cur-
rently direct rivals.
Hoberg and Phillips (2013) is an example of another recent study that
explores cross-industry relations using language overlaps based on 10-K
relatedness scores. The study examines why conglomerates operate in
some industry combinations more frequently than in others and ﬁnds
that they are most likely to operate in industry pairs that are close to-
gether in the product space and that spatially surround other highly val-
ued industries. These ﬁndings are consistent with conglomerate ﬁrms
using industry relatedness to potentially enter nearby high-value indus-
tries that might otherwise be costly to enter.
V.
External Validation
Our next objective is to compare our industry classiﬁcations to existing
SIC and NAICS industry classiﬁcations. Throughout, we hold ﬁxed the
degree of granularity of the industries we examine, and we compare clas-
siﬁcations on their ability to generate higher across-industry variation in
key ﬁrm characteristics (subsection A). We then examine which classiﬁ-
text-based network industries
1443

cation best explains managerial discussions of high competition and
ﬁrm disclosures of self-identiﬁed rivals (subsection B).
A.
Across-Industry Variation
We compare the informativeness of industry classiﬁcations on the basis
of the extent to which they generate higher levels of across-industry var-
iation in proﬁtability, sales growth, and stock market risk (market betas).
Because we hold ﬁxed the degree of granularity in the classiﬁcations we
compare, we conclude that a classiﬁcation generating a higher degree of
across-industry variation is more informative.
To ensure consistency in our tests, we compute the degree of across-
industry variation using both a ﬁrm-weighted approach and an industry-
weighted approach. For the ﬁrm-weighted approach, we ﬁrst compute
the given ﬁrm’s industry value of a given characteristic as the mean of
the given characteristic among its industry peers. We then compute
across-industry variation as the standard deviation of these industry char-
acteristics across all ﬁrm-year observations in our sample. The ﬁrm-
weighted calculation is particularly relevant for the intransitive text-based
network classiﬁcation, as each ﬁrm has a unique set of peers. The ﬁrm-
weighted approach thus allows us to compare text-based network indus-
tries to other classiﬁcations including 10-K ﬁxed industry classiﬁcations,
three-digit SIC, and four-digit NAICS industries.
Industry-weighted estimates of across-industry variation are computed,
for each industry-year observation, by ﬁrst computing the average charac-
teristic among all ﬁrms in the given industry in the given year. Industry-
weighted variation of a given characteristic is then the standard devia-
tion of these industry characteristics across all industry-year observations
in our sample. We note that this calculation is feasible only for industry
classiﬁcations that satisfy the industry transitivity property, as intransi-
tive industries are ﬁrm speciﬁc and observations exist at the ﬁrm-year
level.
Panel A of table 3 displays the results of the ﬁrm-weighted calcula-
tions. The table shows that 10-K-based ﬁxed industries have more across-
industry variation than SIC-3 or NAICS-4 industries for all ﬁve character-
istics we consider. Regarding proﬁtability deﬁned as operating income/
sales (OI/sales), across-industry variation is 0.204 and 0.205 for SIC-3
and NAICS-4, respectively. This increases 12.7 percent to 0.231 for 10-K-
based ﬁxed industries. We observe similar gains regarding OI/sales, sales
growth, market beta, and the unlevered asset beta. We conclude that 10-
K-based ﬁxed industries are more informative than both SIC-3 and
NAICS-4. It is also important to note that the 10-K-based ﬁxed classiﬁca-
tion is calibrated to have the same granularity as SIC-3, and both classi-
ﬁcations are also constrained to have ﬁxed locations and to be transitive.
1444
journal of political economy

These gains reveal the informativeness of the information source (text in
the 10-K) and not the network methods.
Panel A also compares the transitive classiﬁcations (SIC-3, NAICS-4,
and 10-K-based 300 industries) to the intransitive text-based network clas-
siﬁcation. Because transitivity limits the ﬂexibility of a network, we ex-
pect the intransitive network classiﬁcation to have higher across-industry
variation. The table conﬁrms this prediction. Regarding OI/sales, the
across-industry variation of 0.231 for 10-K-based ﬁxed industries increases
by another 7.4 percent to 0.248 for the equal-weighted text-based network
classiﬁcation and by 15.6 percent to 0.267 for the similarity-weighted
network classiﬁcation. We observe similar, and in some cases larger, gains
for the other characteristics. For example, we see a nearly 30 percent in-
crease for asset betas when comparing 10-K-based ﬁxed industries and
similarity-weighted network industries. We conclude overall that 10-K-
based classiﬁcations are more informative than SIC and NAICS classiﬁca-
tions and also that the intransitive text-based network classiﬁcation is even
more informative when compared to all three ﬁxed industry classiﬁca-
tions.
Panel B of table 3 repeats the tests in panel A using industry-weighted
calculations rather than ﬁrm-weighted calculations. Although this calcu-
lation is feasible only for transitive classiﬁcations, the conclusions are the
same as those in panel A. The 10-K-based ﬁxed classiﬁcation is more in-
formative than the SIC-3 and NAICS-4 classiﬁcations. The improvements
TABLE 3
Firm Characteristics and Industry Classiﬁcations
Industry Controls
OI/Sales
OI/
Assets
Sales
Growth
Market
Beta
Asset
Beta
A. Across-Industry Standard Deviations: Firm-
Weighted Results; All Industry Classiﬁcations
1. SIC-3 ﬁxed effects
.204
.111
.126
.283
.271
2. NAICS-4 ﬁxed effects
.205
.112
.136
.289
.276
3. 10-K-based 300 ﬁxed effects
.231
.128
.157
.298
.285
4. TNIC equal-weighted average
.248
.142
.163
.332
.324
5. TNIC similarity-weighted average
(excluding the focal ﬁrm)
.267
.153
.199
.384
.369
B. Across-Industry Standard Deviations: Industry-
Weighted Results; Transitive Industry
Classiﬁcations Only
1. SIC-3 ﬁxed effects
.156
.111
.179
.347
.308
2. NAICS-4 ﬁxed effects
.169
.126
.210
.414
.362
3. 10-K-based 300 ﬁxed effects
.202
.139
.224
.469
.432
Note.—For a given variable indicated in the left-hand column, across-industry standard
deviations are computed as the standard deviation of the industry average of the given var-
iable across all ﬁrms in our sample (panel A) and across all industries (panel B). TNIC re-
fers to text-based network industries.
text-based network industries
1445

are also economically large. For OI/sales, the gain is nearly 30 percent
relative to SIC-3 and nearly 20 percent relative to NAICS-4. The results
in panel B thus ensure that the results in panel A are not highly inﬂu-
enced by ﬁrm versus industry weighting.
B.
Competition and Reported Peers
In this section, we examine whether ﬁrms with more text-based network
rivals, and more similar such rivals, are more likely to disclose competi-
tive pressures in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis section of
their 10-K.
Our approach follows Hoberg and Maksimovic (2015), and we examine
the Management’s Discussion and Analysis section of each ﬁrm’s 10-K. A
primary source of content in this section is the manager’s discussion of
his or her ﬁrm’s performance and the ﬁrm’s outlook going forward. For
each ﬁrm year, we thus deﬁne the high competition dummy to be one if
the manager cites “high competition,” or one of its synonyms, in this sec-
tion.16
Table 4 displays the results of logit regressions in which the dependent
variable is the high competition dummy. Standard errors are adjusted
for clustering at the ﬁrm level. Our primary independent variables are
measures of the total similarity surrounding each ﬁrm. Total similarity
is a global measure and is the sum of the pairwise similarities between
the given ﬁrm and all other ﬁrms in our sample in the given year. We pre-
dict that a manager of a ﬁrm with higher total similarity will be more likely
to disclose discussions noting higher levels of competition in his or her
ﬁrm’s Management’s Discussion and Analysis section of its 10-K.
We also decompose total similarity into respective components based
on how far given rivals are from the focal ﬁrm in the product market
space. Our ﬁrst measure, total similarity (top 2 percent peers), consid-
ers only total similarity summed over the set of ﬁrm pairs with pairwise
similarities above the 98th percentile in the given year. This measures
the degree to which the ﬁrm has “close rivals”: those with a degree of
similarity analogous to the SIC-3 classiﬁcation (where roughly 2 percent
of all ﬁrm pairs are in the same SIC-3 classiﬁcation). Overall, we consider
summed similarity in the following bands: 0.0–2.0 percent, 2.0–5.0 per-
cent, 5.0–10.0 percent, and 10.0–25.0 percent. This test is made pos-
sible by the fact that the text-based network provides a pairwise similar-
ity score for every ﬁrm pair in our sample, and the objective is to identify
the extent to which competitive pressures are felt by managers even when
ﬁrms are more distant in the product space. Evidence of competitive
16 Synonyms for the word “high” include intense, signiﬁcant, substantial, signiﬁcant, vig-
orous, strong, aggressive, ﬁerce, stiff, extensive, or severe. Synonyms for the word “compe-
tition” include compete, competition, or competing.
1446
journal of political economy

TABLE 4
Managerial Indications of High Competition and Industry Similarity Measures
Total Similarity
No. of Words
Row
Total
Top 2%
Peers
Top 3%–
5% Peers
Top 6%–
10% Peers
Top 11%–
25% Peers
OI/
Assets
Log Firm
Age
Tobin’s
Q
Log
Sales
Bus.
Desc.
MD&A
R
2
1
.527
.047
(16.37)
2
.387
.039
(12.41)
3
.244
.030
(8.82)
4
.022
.024
(.81)
5
2.344
.032
(211.04)
6
.347
.234
.001
2.237
.049
(10.90)
(8.09)
(.04)
(26.64)
7
.400
.038
2.061
.061
2.211
2.360
1.111
.148
(10.63)
(1.52)
(22.06)
(3.03)
(25.51)
(211.01)
(30.92)
8
.286
.026
2.060
.079
2.255
2.343
1.136
.145
(8.54)
(1.08)
(22.04)
(3.95)
(26.75)
(210.76)
(31.40)
9
.142
.015
2.068
.095
2.233
2.268
1.148
.141
(4.76)
(.61)
(22.35)
(4.78)
(26.14)
(28.80)
(31.65)
10
.024
.010
2.066
.107
2.256
2.268
1.164
.140
(.81)
(.40)
(22.28)
(5.41)
(26.74)
(28.85)
(31.96)
11
2.252
.016
2.064
.088
2.237
2.281
1.151
.143
(27.68)
(.66)
(22.19)
(4.47)
(26.24)
(29.06)
(31.71)
12
.253
.139
2.036
2.212
.036
2.060
.054
2.218
2.345
1.111
.149
(7.52)
(4.51)
(21.05)
(25.42)
(1.46)
(22.02)
(2.69)
(25.68)
(210.63)
(30.83)
Note.—N 5 41,823. The table reports the results of logistic regressions in which the dependent variable is one if the ﬁrm’s management mentions high competition (or a synonym
thereof) in its Management’s Discussion and Analysis section of its 10-K in the given year. Independent variables include measures of similarity using the text-based network pairwise
network. In addition to the total similarity of all peers, we also consider the total similarity based on stepwise groups of the most similar peers (top 2 percent, 5 percent, 10 percent, and
25 percent). Each localized peer group is orthogonalized in a stepwise fashion (from 2 percent to 25 percent). Additional control variables include sales, age, proﬁtability, Tobin’s Q,
year ﬁxed effects, and document size variables including the number of words in the business description and in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) section of the
ﬁrm’s 10-K. All independent variables are standardized for ease of comparison; t-statistics in parentheses are based on standard errors adjusted for clustering by ﬁrm.

pressures from more distant peers would support the conclusion that is-
sues relating to potential entry threats, and issues relating to incentives to
pursue limit pricing, likely apply in the universe of US publicly traded ﬁrms.
Table 4 shows the results of this test, where the dependent variable is
an indicator variable indicating that the manager discusses competitive
pressures. Row 1 shows that ﬁrms with higher global total similarity are
far more likely to discuss competitive pressures in their management’s
discussion. This result suggests that information in the text-based net-
work classiﬁcation is informative regarding the presence of ﬁrms that
managers themselves perceive to actually be rivals. In particular, these
rivals pose competitive threats that managers feel obliged to mention
when interpreting their ﬁrm’s performance and future prospects.
Rows 2–6 further show that these competitive pressures extend beyond
the range typically studied by researchers. In particular, many studies
control for three-digit SIC industries, which has a granularity of roughly
2 percent. Rows 3 and 6 show that managers facing more distant rivals in
the 2.0–5.0 percent band, on the margin, also are more likely to disclose
issues relating to higher competition in their 10-Ks. Because all indepen-
dent variables arestandardized,wecanalsocomparemagnitudes.There-
sults suggest that competition in the nearest band is roughly 50 percent
more important than competition in the second band; however, both
bands are highly signiﬁcant. These ﬁndings are consistent with the con-
clusion that managers react not only to current rivals in their immediate
markets but also to rivals in neighboring markets that might pose poten-
tial entry threats.
In rows 7–12 of table 4, we explore the robustness of this conclusion
to various control variables that might also be related to competitive
pressures including ﬁrm size, age, proﬁtability, and Tobin’s Q. Because
it is well known that document size can inﬂuence text-based variables,
we also control for the size of the ﬁrm’s Management’s Discussion and
Analysis section. In all, we ﬁnd that our primary total similarity variables
weaken somewhat as the new controls are added. However, all variables
remain highly signiﬁcant, and our primary conclusions obtain with or
without the controls.
We also consider the approach used by Rauh and Suﬁ(2012), who
gather data from Capital IQ identifying the ﬁrms listed by each ﬁrm in
its 10-K as being a rival. We note that one important limitation in this anal-
ysis is that Capital IQ data are not available on a historical basis. We thus
extract Capital IQ peers using 2011 data, and we examine whether text-
based network industries computed using the last year of our data (2008)
can better explain the Capital IQ peers relative to SIC-3 or NAICS-4 in-
dustries. We display the results in table 5. The table reveals that our net-
work industries outperform SIC-3 and NAICS-4 industries in their ability
to explain Capital IQ self-reported peers. For example, our baseline ap-
1448
journal of political economy

proach that uses nouns and proper nouns and a 25 percent stop word
threshold generates 52.5 percent overlap with Capital IQ peers. This com-
pares to 47.1 percent for SIC-3. Our peers perform even better relative to
NAICS-4: 55.1 percent overlap compared to 44.0 percent. Given that our
comparisons hold industry granularity constant, we conclude that these
results are driven by economic informativeness and are not due to tech-
nical differences in granularity.
VI.
Capturing Industry Change
In this section we assess changes in ﬁrm similarity and product market
location following two major exogenous industry shocks. We examine
the impact of these shocks on the total similarity of rivals around a given
ﬁrm, the number of industry rivals, and the extent of product market dis-
location (changes in the products offered). We ﬁrst consider the military
goods and services industry following the shock to military spending af-
TABLE 5
Self-Reported Capital IQ Peers and Industry Classiﬁcations
Text-Based Industries
(SIC-3 Granularity)
Text-Based Industries
(NAICS-4 Granularity)
Words Used for
TNIC Industry
Stop Word
Threshold
(%)
TNIC
Overlap
with
Capital IQ
(%)
TNIC
Overlap
with SIC-3
(%)
TNIC
Overlap
with
Capital IQ
(%)
TNIC
Overlap
with NAICS-4
(%)
All words
100
40.9
46.6
43.1
61.8
All words
25
50.6
50.2
53.0
65.8
All words
10
60.1
49.1
62.3
61.5
All words
TF-IDF
59.3
49.0
61.9
65.6
Nouns and proper
nouns
100
43.7
47.3
46.2
62.5
Nouns and proper
nouns
25
52.5
50.2
55.1
65.6
Nouns and proper
nouns
10
62.0
45.8
63.5
54.4
Nouns and proper
nouns
TF-IDF
58.5
48.1
61.0
64.6
Note.—The table reports the fraction of Capital IQ 2011 peers that are also peers as
identiﬁed by various other industry classiﬁcations, including SIC-3, NAICS-4, and text-
based network classiﬁcations (TNIC) constructed to have levels of granularity identical
to those of SIC-3 and NAICS-4. The table also reports the fraction of overlap between
SIC-3 and TNIC and also between NAICS-4 and TNIC. The overlap between SIC-3 and Cap-
ital IQ competitors is 47.1 percent. The overlap between NAICS-4 and Capital IQ compet-
itors is 44.0 percent. Although Capital IQ data are from 2011 (historical peer data are not
available), all SIC, NAICS, and TNIC data are from 2008. The Stop Word Threshold col-
umn indicates whether we discard common words deﬁned as those used in at least 10 per-
cent, 25 percent, or 100 percent of all documents or if we instead use TF-IDF to weight
common words less heavily as an alternative to discarding them.
text-based network industries
1449

ter the events of September 11, 2001. Our second analysis is based on the
software industry following the technology stock market collapse (dot-
com shock) beginning in March 2000.
We choose these two shocks because of their importance in shaping
the trajectory of large numbers of ﬁrms in these industries and also be-
cause these examples best illustrate unique features of text-based net-
work industries that make them well suited to address research questions
involving time-varying changes that are difﬁcult to analyze using other
industry classiﬁcations. Because one shock is a positive demand shock
(defense) and the other is a negative demand shock (software), these
choices also allow us to explore if product markets react differently to
positive and negative shocks.
A.
Military Intelligence and Battleﬁeld Products
Figure 3 displays the scale and timing of the positive military spending
demand shock. Prior to 2001, US military spending gradually declined
from nearly 6 percent of GDP to just 3 percent of GDP. After 2001, this
trend sharply reversed, and spending increased to just below 5 percent
of GDP by 2009. Although much of the observed increase from 3 per-
cent to 5 percent is gradual, we expect that industry participants knew
at the time of the September 11 attacks that future spending would grow
and the growth would be large and long-lasting. We focus on how the
product market changed before and after 2001. We also note that this
shock has a large magnitude (1–2 percent of annual US GDP) and it
is also exogenous, as market participants did not expect the 2001 at-
tacks. This shock presents a nearly ideal laboratory for examining the
FIG. 3.—Annual military spending by the United States as a fraction of GDP (source:
World Bank). Color version available as an online enhancement.
1450
journal of political economy

impact of a large demand shock on product market structure and dislo-
cation.
Product market research assessing the impact of the September 11
attacks on the military industry is difﬁcult using existing classiﬁcations
for three reasons. First, military products span many different SIC- and
NAICS-based industries including heavy equipment, transportation, elec-
tronics, software, security, and medical equipment. Second, only a frac-
tion of the ﬁrms in each market actually sell to the military. A manual re-
view of all ﬁrms would be necessary to identify the relevant set engaged
in selling to the military.
Third, existing industry classiﬁcations are not updated materially over
time. A researcher would have to manually assess how ﬁrms supplying to
the military changed over time. For example, some ﬁrms might begin or
terminate sales to the military. Also, updated product offering data are
not available using other classiﬁcations, making the issue of product mar-
ket dislocation very difﬁcult to study. Because text-based network indus-
tries are based on the actual vocabulary used in annual ﬁrm 10-Ks, we are
able to solve these problems directly.
We use the series of matrices Q t containing the product words (de-
ﬁned in Sec. II) to identify the set of ﬁrms likely providing goods and
services to the military. For a given year t, Q t is the set of normalized
product word vectors for all ﬁrms in the sample in that year. Each ﬁrm’s
product word vector has length W (the number of unique 10-K words),
and each element identiﬁes whether or not the given ﬁrm uses the spe-
ciﬁc word corresponding to that element.
We consider two queries on Q t. We ﬁrst identify the set of “military in-
telligence ﬁrms” as the set of all ﬁrms that use all three of the following
terms in their business descriptions in year t: “military,” “defense,” and
“intelligence.” In our second test, we identify the set of “military battle-
ﬁeld ﬁrms” as the set of ﬁrms using all of the following four terms in year t:
“military,” “defense,” “battleﬁeld,” and “equipment.” We consider both to
explore potential differential treatment effects in these related markets.
Because Q t is updated and comprehensive, these queries immediately
yield the set of ﬁrms addressing each market in each year.
Our hypotheses are that (A) the 9/11 attacks generate a positive de-
mand shock in these markets, and we expect an increase in entry and to-
tal similarity following the shock; and (B) we expect a shift in product
location to reﬂect changing needs of the military after this shock. To test
the ﬁrst hypothesis, we compute the following averages over ﬁrms in
each product market in time series: the average total text-based network
similarity surrounding each ﬁrm and the average number of network ri-
vals faced by each ﬁrm. We assess each statistic in time series, and we test
the ﬁrst hypothesis by examining if each variable experiences a struc-
tural break after 2001.
text-based network industries
1451

To test the second hypothesis, we use the information in Q t in a differ-
ent way. For each word wk corresponding to the W columns in Q t, we com-
pute the extent to which wk has grown in usage in the given market after
the shock. Words experiencing the highest positive change indicate
product words that increased most in use after the shock. Words receiv-
ing the most negative change indicate product words that experienced
the most severe decline. Assessment of these word change vocabularies
illustrates the extent to which product markets experienced a location
shift after the September 11 attacks.
Figures 4 and 5 display results for military intelligence ﬁrms and mil-
itary battleﬁeld ﬁrms, respectively. Panel A in both ﬁgures reports the
FIG. 4.—Military intelligence ﬁrms: competitor changes. Time-series changes in indus-
try attributes for ﬁrms stating the following three words in their business descriptions: mil-
itary, defense, and intelligence. Note that structural break tests regarding whether local sim-
ilarity of rivals changed before and after 2001 are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level. A similar
test based on the number of rivals is not signiﬁcant. We also report the words that grew
(shrank) in prominence before and after the 2001 military demand shock (we display
the fraction of ﬁrms using the given word before and after the shock).
1452
journal of political economy

time-series statistics describing the number of ﬁrms in each product mar-
ket, the degree of total similarity, and the average number of text-based
network rivals faced by ﬁrms in each market. The caption of each ﬁgure
reports the results of tests examining whether each industry experienced
a structural break in total similarity and the number of rivals after 2001.
In ﬁgure 4, a structural break test on the level of total similarity is sig-
niﬁcant at the 1 percent level. A similar test regarding the average num-
ber of rivals is just below standard levels of statistical signiﬁcance. In ﬁg-
ure 5, both structural break tests are signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level. We
conclude that the 2001 shock resulted in an increase in total similarity,
indicating increased competition. The positive demand shock likely
triggered entry (or movement by existing ﬁrms) into newly demanded
FIG. 5.—Military battleﬁeld ﬁrms: competitor changes. Time-series changes in industry
attributes for ﬁrms stating the following three words in their business descriptions: military,
defense battleﬁeld, and equipment. Note that structural break tests regarding whether lo-
cal similarity of rivals changed before and after 2001 are signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level. A
similar test based on the number of rivals is also signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level. We also re-
port the words that grew (shrank) in prominence before and after the 2001 military demand
shock (we display the fraction of ﬁrms using the given word before and after the shock).
text-based network industries
1453

military intelligence and battleﬁeld products. We conclude that industry
participants likely beneﬁted from the positive demand shock. However,
these gains were likely offset, at least in part, by increased competition.
Panels B and C display the results of the product market location
change tests. Panel B reports the words that most increased in usage af-
ter the shock (2002 vs. 2000). For military intelligence ﬁrms in ﬁgure 4,
we ﬁnd an increased focus on surveillance (47.2 percent of ﬁrms use the
term in 2002, compared to just 22.5 percent in 2000). This is consistent
with information gathering being a central theme for the military after
the shock. We also observe an increased focus on disasters, e-mail, inte-
grators, and the speciﬁc ﬁrm Northrop Grumman. These results also
support an increased focus on information gathering, especially the
gathering of nonbattleﬁeld intelligence. The results for military battle-
ﬁeld ﬁrms in ﬁgure 5 are similar, and we also see an increased focus on
surveillance, optics, simulation, artillery, infrastructure, and cleanup.
These results support the conclusion that military battleﬁeld ﬁrms be-
came more focused on possible ground conﬂicts and that simulations,
infrastructure, and artillery likely played a central role.
Panel C reports words that became less utilized after the shock. In ﬁg-
ure 4, key terms include broadcast, microwave, microelectronics, trans-
mitters, and the speciﬁc ﬁrm Litton. These results indicate a declining
focus on information transmission and electronic devices. Put together
with panel B, we ﬁnd a likely dislocation away from information trans-
mission and toward nonbattleﬁeld information-gathering technolo-
gies. For military battleﬁeld ﬁrms in ﬁgure 5, the following terms de-
clined in usage: subassemblies, broadcast, radar, algorithms, airframes,
and the speciﬁc ﬁrms Motorola and Lockheed. Together with panel B,
these results suggest a shift away from traditional air power and communi-
cation and toward a focus on potential ground conﬂicts.
Overall, we conclude that the September 11 shock resulted in two im-
portant changes for both military industries: an increase in entry into
new high-demand markets and product changes toward nonbattleﬁeld
information gathering and products intended for potential ground con-
ﬂicts. Because the shock was exogenous, it is likely that the shock caused
these changes.
B.
Software Industry
We next consider the post-2000 software market collapse. This shock is
also large in size and is also difﬁcult to examine using traditional indus-
try classiﬁcations (software ﬁrms are typically lumped with many other
ﬁrms into a business services SIC code, and this market also experi-
enced rapid change over time). It is also important to note that this is
a negative demand shock, whereas the military shock was a positive
1454
journal of political economy

shock. Our empirical approach is identical to that used for the military
industry above. We deﬁne the software market broadly to include ﬁrms
with all three of the following terms in their business descriptions in
year t: “software,” “computer,” and “program.”
Panel A of ﬁgure 6 shows a decline in the total similarity surrounding
each ﬁrm and in the average number of text-based network rivals in the
software industry. The decline is large in magnitude and long-lasting.
This suggests that the negative shock led to ﬁrm exit or movement by
ﬁrms into other product markets. We conclude that this negative de-
mand shock created a symmetric-opposite result relative to the positive
shock in the military industry. However, we also note that the process
of consolidation following the negative shock is more gradual and slow
FIG. 6.—Software ﬁrms: competitor changes. Time-series changes in industry attributes
for ﬁrms stating the following three words in their business descriptions: software, computer,
and program. Note that structural break tests regarding whether local similarity of rivals
changed before and after 2001 are signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level. A similar test based
on the number of rivals is also signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level. We also report the words
that grew (shrank) in prominence before and after the 2001 military demand shock (we
display the fraction of ﬁrms using the given word before and after the shock).
text-based network industries
1455

moving relative to the realignment following the positive shocks in the
military industry.
Panels B and C of ﬁgure 6 show that the software industry also expe-
rienced product market dislocation after the shock. Panel B shows a
movement toward a focus on e-mail, intelligence, Linux, portals, and life
cycles. Panel C shows a dislocation away from Unix, mainframes, intra-
net, telemarketing, and workstations.
Our study suggests that major exogenous demand shocks affect indus-
tries in ways not well documented in the existing literature. We observe
large changes in market structure and product similarity, and also prod-
uct market dislocation, indicating that industry boundaries are undergo-
ing large changes over time.
VII.
Endogenous Barriers to Entry
In this section, we examine how measures of industry similarity and prof-
itability change over time following Sutton (1991), who predicts that ad-
vertising and R&D can create endogenous barriers to entry. An example
from “An Illustration of Dual Structure” in Sutton’s Sunk Costs and Market
Structure, section 3.4, illustrates the logic behind our empirical design. In
Sutton’s example, we observe a ﬁrm moving between two industries as it,
and possibly some rivals, increase their advertising spending in order to
become a small group of leading brands that sell to brand-sensitive buy-
ers, thus escaping the large number of ﬁrms that do not advertise but
rather “sell on price.”
The main idea is that R&D and advertising can create unique products
that appeal to quality-sensitive consumers, making it more expensive for
rivals to enter. A key assumption is that advertising and R&D (which
might be geared toward improving product appeal) are actually effective
in reducing ex post similarity. We test this assumption by regressing changes
in ex post similarity and proﬁtability on ex ante advertising and R&D lev-
els. We recognize that these tests examine association, as it is difﬁcult to
establish causality in this setting. This analysis complements the study by
Ellickson (2007), who analyzes the supermarket industry, and further il-
lustrates the challenges that Ellickson notes on providing evidence on
endogenous ﬁxed costs.
We focus on text-based network industries for this test, as observing
changes in industry memberships and industry locations is critical to
testing Sutton’s theory, which is primarily about trying to solidify indus-
try boundaries and prevent entry across industry boundaries. Fixed in-
dustry classiﬁcations lack this ﬂexibility because their industry locations
are ﬁxed over time, and memberships rarely change.
Table 6 displays the results. We consider text-based network industry re-
sults in panel A. One observation is one ﬁrm in one year. The dependent
1456
journal of political economy

TABLE 6
Ex Ante Advertising and R&D versus Future Similarity
Dependent Variable
Positive
Advertising
Dummy
Positive
R&D Dummy
Log Industry
Adver./Sales
Log Industry
R&D/Sales
Industry Past
Stock Return
Log Assets
Industry Log
B/M Ratio
Adjusted R
2
A. Text-Based Network Industry Regressions
1. D total similarity
2.414
2.152
2.034
2.005
.055
.018
2.004
.127
(213.72)
(25.80)
(28.55)
(21.37)
(1.63)
(2.71)
(2.25)
2. D number of rivals
212.301
21.997
21.195
.156
2.184
1.636
21.616
.102
(26.94)
(21.70)
(24.83)
(.87)
(1.41)
(4.38)
(21.23)
3. D proﬁtability
.038
.039
.004
.005
2.022
2.010
.014
.078
(4.61)
(6.61)
(5.15)
(7.38)
(24.92)
(28.43)
(3.74)
B. Industry-Adjusted Firm-Level Regressions
4. D total similarity
2.037
2.116
2.005
2.020
.059
.016
.020
.121
(21.33)
(25.15)
(2.83)
(24.25)
(1.76)
(2.40)
(1.29)
5. D number of rivals
2.775
23.768
2.103
2.738
2.208
1.464
21.291
.100
(2.62)
(24.03)
(2.37)
(23.71)
(1.42)
(3.99)
(2.96)
6. D proﬁtability
.031
.053
.007
.013
.009
.015
.001
.015
(4.83)
(9.22)
(5.21)
(10.87)
(2.97)
(11.15)
(.27)
Note.—Ordinary least squares regressions with ex post product changes in total similarity and the number of rivals and proﬁtability as the dependent
variables. Panel A is based on advertising and R&D computed at the text-based network industry level. Panel B is based on ﬁrm-level network-industry-
adjusted advertising and R&D. All speciﬁcations include 10-K-based ﬁxed industry classiﬁcation and yearly ﬁxed effects; t-statistics in parentheses are
based on standard errors adjusted for clustering by year and industry. The sample has 49,246 observations.

variable for each row is noted in the left-hand column. We consider three
dependent variables: the change in ex post total similarity, the change
in the number of text-based network rivals, and the change in average
proﬁtability of ﬁrms in the focal ﬁrm’s network industry. The indepen-
dent variables include dummies for industries having zero advertising
and R&D expenditures. We also include the natural logarithm of the av-
erage R&D/sales and advertising/sales for industries that have nonzero
spending. This allows us to examine the effects of having R&D and adver-
tising programs and also the effect of intensity in each category. Finally,
we include controls for size, stock returns, and the book to market ratio.
In panel B, we repeat these same tests using ﬁrm-level advertising and
R&D.
Table 6 shows strong support for Sutton’s predictions using both text-
based network industry level (panel A) and ﬁrm-level (panel B) R&D
and advertising. For example, row 1 shows that ﬁrms in network indus-
tries with nonzero R&D and advertising, and also those with more in-
tense spending, experience ex post reductions in their total similarity.
We observe similar results in row 2 regarding the number of rivals, where
results are particularly strong for advertising but are not signiﬁcant for
R&D. Examining ex post proﬁtability in row 3, we ﬁnd support for the
conclusion that both advertising and R&D are associated with increasing
ex post proﬁtability. The results are similar in panel B, suggesting that
these effects hold at both the ﬁrm and the industry levels.
To understand the intuition for these results, we conduct a detailed
analysis of one industry: the online education industry. We deﬁne this
industry as the set of text-based network peer ﬁrms surrounding the
Apollo Group, which runs the University of Phoenix, a large provider
of online education programs.
Table 7 displays time-series statistics for the network industry surround-
ing Apollo Group during our sample period. We chose this example be-
cause the improvements in (and the declining costs of) technology likely
reduced the natural barriers to entry in this industry. We thus predict
that ﬁrms providing online education would have strong incentives to in-
vest in advertising to reinforce the eroding natural barriers to entry. We
expect a movement toward niche markets established and defended by
higher advertising.
Table 7 supports this intuition. The last two columns, which display
the average advertising to sales ratio for ﬁrms in Apollo’s network indus-
try and the total advertising to total sales ratio for these ﬁrms in aggre-
gate, conﬁrm that advertising among Apollo’s industry rivals increased
dramatically during our sample period. Consistent with a link to barriers
to entry, we also observe declines both in the average number of network
rivals and in the average total similarity among ﬁrms in this market as
advertising ramped up. We conclude that Apollo and its rivals likely had
1458
journal of political economy

high incentives to spend on advertising as natural barriers to entry eroded,
and our evidence suggests that this strategy was successful.
VIII.
Conclusions
We use web crawling and text parsing algorithms to build new measures
of ﬁrm pairwise product similarity based on business descriptions from
ﬁrm 10-Ks ﬁled with the SEC. The word usage vectors from each ﬁrm
generate an empirical Hotelling-like product market space on which
all ﬁrms reside. We use these vectors to calculate how ﬁrms are related
to each other and to create new industry classiﬁcations. These new clas-
siﬁcations enable us to assess product market changes and the impact of
major shocks and to test theories of product differentiation and whether
ﬁrms advertise and conduct R&D to create product differentiation con-
sistent with Sutton’s (1991) work on endogenous barriers to entry.
Our new text-based network industry classiﬁcations are based on how
ﬁrms describe themselves in the product description section of their 10-Ks.
Because our classiﬁcations are updated in each year, they do not have
the time-ﬁxed location restrictions associated with SIC and NAICS. In
addition, our main classiﬁcation method is based on relaxing the transi-
tivity restriction of existing SIC and NAICS industries and thus allows
each ﬁrm to have its own potentially unique set of competitors. This
new method, which we term text-based network industry classiﬁcations,
is analogous to a social network in which each individual can have a dis-
tinct set of friends or to geographic networks in which the distance from
a ﬁrm determines whether or not it is a competitor.
TABLE 7
Advertising and Total Similarity Surrounding Apollo
In Group
Year
No.
of Firms
in Group
Average
Total
Similarity
Average
No. of
TNIC Rivals
Average
Advertising/
Sales
Total
Advertising/
Total Sales
1997
20
102.4
8.9
.013
.003
1998
19
98.2
11.6
.011
.008
1999
23
95.5
11.6
.031
.029
2000
24
86.3
11.0
.081
.028
2001
17
78.9
9.765
.031
.023
2002
15
72.9
9.3
.037
.033
2003
17
66.6
7.8
.041
.035
2004
15
62.8
7.9
.047
.040
2005
14
61.1
7.9
.057
.067
2006
11
54.8
6.0
.060
.081
2007
12
54.5
6.0
.063
.064
2008
14
54.4
7.1
.058
.060
Note.—The table displays time-series statistics including similarity measures and adver-
tising activity for ﬁrms in Apollo’s network industry during our sample period.
text-based network industries
1459

Measures of similarity in industry groups based on our new classiﬁca-
tions better explain speciﬁc discussions of high competition by manage-
ment and better explain rivals mentioned by managers as peer ﬁrms
than do existing classiﬁcations. Our new industry classiﬁcations also al-
low us to examine how industry membership and rival similarity change
over time in response to exogenous industry shocks and whether adver-
tising and R&D serve as endogenous barriers to entry. We ﬁnd that major
demand shocks in the military and software product markets are fol-
lowed by economically large changes in the number of similar ﬁrms,
the degree of product differentiation, and the type of products ﬁrms of-
fer to the market. We also ﬁnd support for Sutton’s (1991) hypothesis
that ﬁrms spend on advertising and R&D, at least in part, to increase
ex post product differentiation and proﬁtability.
Appendix A
This appendix explains how we compute the “product similarity” and “product dif-
ferentiation” between two ﬁrms i and j. We ﬁrst take the text in each ﬁrm’s product
description and construct a binary vector summarizing its usage of English words.
The vector has a length equal to the number of unique words used in the set of all
product descriptions. For a given ﬁrm, a given element of this vector is one if the
word associated with the given element is in the given ﬁrm’s product description.
To focus on products, we restrict the words in this vector to less commonly used
words. Very common words include articles, conjunctions, personal pronouns, ab-
breviations, and legal jargon, for example. Speciﬁcally, we restrict attention to
words that are either nouns or proper nouns and that also appear in fewer than
25 percent of all business descriptions in the given year. For each ﬁrm i, we thus
have a binary vector Pi, with each element taking a value of one if the associated
word is used in the given ﬁrm’s product description and zero otherwise.
We deﬁne the frequency vector Vi to be normalized to unit length:
Vi 5
Pi
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Pi  Pi
p
:
(A1)
To measure how similar the products of ﬁrms i and j are, we take the dot product
of their normalized vectors, which is their “product similarity”:
Product Similarityi,j 5 ðVi  VjÞ:
(A2)
We deﬁne product differentiation as one minus similarity:
Product Differentiationi,j 5 1 2 ðVi  VjÞ:
(A3)
Because all normalized vectors Vi have a length of one, product similarity and
product differentiation both have the nice property of being bounded in the in-
terval (0, 1). This normalization ensures that product descriptions with fewer
words are not penalized excessively. This method is known as the “cosine similar-
1460
journal of political economy

ity” method, as it measures the cosine of the angle between two vectors on a unit
sphere. The underlying unit sphere also represents an “empirical product mar-
ket space” on which all ﬁrms in the sample have a unique location.
Appendix B
This appendix describes our ﬁxed industry classiﬁcation methodology based on
10-K text similarities. Our classiﬁcation goal is to maximize total within-industry
product similarity subject to two constraints. First, in order to be comparable to
existing methods, a common set of industries must be created and held ﬁxed for
all years in our time series. Thus, we form a ﬁxed set of industries based on our
ﬁrst full year of data (1997). Second, our algorithm should be sufﬁciently ﬂexi-
ble to generate industry classiﬁcations for any number of degrees of freedom.
This latter requirement is important because, in order to compare the quality
of our new classiﬁcations relative to alternatives like three- or four-digit SIC
codes, our classiﬁcations should generate a similar number of industries. We
achieve these goals using a two-stage process: (1) an industry formation stage,
which is based on the ﬁrst full year of our sample; and (2) an industry assignment
stage, which assigns ﬁrms in all years of our sample to the ﬁxed industries deter-
mined in stage 1.
We begin the ﬁrst stage by taking the subsample of N single-segment ﬁrms in
1997 (multiple-segment ﬁrms are identiﬁed using the Compustat segment data-
base). We then initialize our industry classiﬁcations to have N industries, with
each of the N ﬁrms residing within its own one-ﬁrm industry. We then compute
the pairwise similarity for each unique pair of industries j and k, which we denote
as Ij,k.
To reduce the industry count to N 2 1 industries, we take the maximum
pairwise industry similarity as follows:
max
j,k,j≠k Ij,k:
(B1)
The two industries with the highest similarity are then combined, reducing the
industry count by one. This process is repeated until the number of industries
reaches the desired number. Importantly, when two industries with mj and mk
ﬁrms are combined, all industry similarities relative to the new industry must
be recomputed. For a newly created industry l, for example, its similarity with
respect to all other industries q is computed as the average ﬁrm pairwise similar-
ity for all ﬁrm pairs in which one ﬁrm is in industry l and one in industry q as
follows:
Il,q 5 ∑
ml
x51
∑
mq
y51
Sx,y
mlmq
:
(B2)
Here, Sx,y is the ﬁrm-level pairwise similarity between ﬁrm x in industry l and ﬁrm y
in industry q.
Although this method guarantees maximization of within-industry similarity af-
ter one iteration, it does not guarantee this property after more than one iteration.
For example, a ﬁrm that initially ﬁts best with industry j after one iteration might
text-based network industries
1461

ﬁt better with another industry k after several iterations because industry k was not
an option at the time the initial classiﬁcation to industry j was made. Thus, we re-
compute similarities ex post to determine whether within-industry similarity can
be improved by moving ﬁrms to alternative industries. If similarity can be im-
proved, we reclassify suboptimally matched ﬁrms to their industry of best ﬁt.
Once this process is complete, the set of industries generated by the algorithm
will have the desired industry count and will have the property that within-
industry similarity cannot be maximized further by movingany one ﬁrm to another
industry. It is important to note, however, that industry classiﬁcations ﬁtting this
description are not necessarily unique. It is plausible that multiple simultaneous
ﬁrm reassignments can further improve within-industry similarity. We do not
take further steps to ensure uniqueness because of computational limitations.
Also, any departure from the true optimal set of industries would bias our study
away from ﬁnding signiﬁcant results, and thus our approach is conservative
and might understate the true power of 10-K business descriptions.
The industry assignment stage takes the industries formed in the ﬁrst stage as
given and assigns any given ﬁrm in any year to the industry it is most similar to.
We begin by computing an aggregate word usage vector for each industry. Each
vector is based on the universe of words appearing in fewer than 25 percent of all
ﬁrms in 1997 as before. The vector is populated by the count of ﬁrms in the given
industry using the given word, and this vector is then normalized to have unit
length (similarly to how we compute ﬁrm pairwise similarities in App. A). This
normalization ensures that industries using more words are not rewarded on
the basis of size, but rather are rewarded only on the basis of similarity. For a
given ﬁrm that we wish to classify, we simply compute its similarity to all of the
candidate industries and assign the ﬁrm to the industry it is most similar to. A
ﬁrm’s similarity to an industry is simply the dot product of the ﬁrm’s normalized
word vector to the industry’s normalized word vector.
Although we use the ﬁrst full year of our sample, 1997, to form industries, we
do not believe that this procedure generates any look-ahead bias. The industry
formation itself is purely a function of the text in product descriptions and
the deﬁnition of a multiple segment ﬁrm obtained from Compustat. We use mul-
tiple segment identiﬁers from 1996, which precedes our sample, and our results
are virtually unchanged if we further omit 1997 from our sample.
Appendix C
In this appendix, we further assess the performance of 10-K-based ﬁxed industries
versus SIC and NAICS industries by exploring various levels of granularity. A key ad-
vantage of our approach is the ability to set granularity to any arbitrary level. We use
theAkaikeinformationcriterion(AIC)toexaminewhichlevelofgranularityismost
likely to explain ﬁrm characteristic data. Understanding granularity is relevant to
understanding the role and breadth of economies of scope.
Table C1 presents the results of the AIC tests. For all four levels of SIC granularity
(panel A), all six levels of NAICS granularity (panel B), and product description–
based industries ranging from 50 to 800 industries (panel C), we compute the AIC
statistic and the adjusted R-squared from regressions in which the dependent var-
iable is proﬁtability scaled by sales or assets, and the independent variable is a set
1462
journal of political economy

TABLE C1
Industry Classiﬁcations and Industry Granularity
OI/Sales
OI/Assets
Industry Deﬁnition
Akaike
Information
Criterion
Adjusted R
2
Akaike
Information
Criterion
Adjusted R
2
No. of
Industries
Average
No. of Firms
per Industry
A. SIC Code–Based Industry Deﬁnitions
1. SIC-1-digit
3,459.7
.143
259.1
2.000
10
538.1
2. SIC-2-digit
2,990.9
.224
2303.8
.048
72
74.7
3. SIC-3-digit
2,827.1
.273
2730.4
.132
274
19.6
4. SIC-4-digit
2,782.9
.298
2864.7
.183
434
12.4
B. NAICS-Based Industry Deﬁnitions
5. NAICS-1-digit
3,897.9
.070
2215.9
.031
9
597.9
6. NAICS-2-digit
3,249.1
.177
2504.7
.086
23
234.0
7. NAICS-3-digit
2,960.4
.230
2778.8
.142
97
55.5
8. NAICS-4-digit
2,843.7
.272
2890.5
.190
331
16.3
9. NAICS-5-digit
3,143.4
.262
2575.5
.176
680
7.9
10. NAICS-6-digit
3,334.4
.263
2381.1
.178
1,002
5.4
C. 10-K Product Description–Based Industry Deﬁnitions
11. 10-K-based-50
2,581.7
.278
21,172.3
.198
50
107.6
12. 10-K-based-100
2,413.8
.308
21,272.9
.222
100
53.8
13. 10-K-based-200
2,438.5
.312
21,221.9
.223
200
26.9
14. 10-K-based-250
2,417.1
.321
21,245.1
.232
250
21.5
15. 10-K-based-300
2,370.4
.328
21,258.7
.237
300
17.9
16, 10-K-based-400
2,348.0
.338
21,253.0
.243
400
13.5
17. 10-K-based-500
2,440.7
.333
21,196.1
.244
500
10.8
18. 10-K-based-800
2,603.0
.329
21,076.9
.245
800
6.7
Note.—The table reports the average Akaike information criterion (AIC) for cross-sectional regressions in which proﬁtability is regressed on a spec-
iﬁed set of industry ﬁxed effects. To avoid clustering over time (which would bias AIC tests), we run separate regressions in each year from 1997 to 2008
and report average AIC scores.

of industry ﬁxed effects based on the given classiﬁcation. To avoid clustering of
ﬁrm observations over time, which could bias AIC tests, we run separate cross-
sectional regressions in each year and we then report the average AIC scores and
the average adjusted R-squared calculations based on 10 regressions from 1997
to 2006. Classiﬁcations with lower AIC scores are more likely to explain the data.
Panel A shows that three- and four-digit SIC classiﬁcations are most informa-
tive and dominate two-digit SIC codes. This suggests that the wide usage of three-
digit SIC codes in existing studies is reasonable. Panel B suggests that four-digit
NAICS dominates other resolutions, suggesting that NAICS-4 might be a substi-
tute for SIC-3. Because AIC scores are designed to permit comparisons across in-
dustries using different information sources and industry counts, we can also
broadly compare SIC to NAICS. Panels A and B show that SIC and NAICS are
reasonable substitutes for each other. NAICS is marginally better when explain-
ing proﬁtability scaled by assets, and SIC is marginally better when explaining
proﬁtability scaled by sales. Our results do not support the conclusion that
NAICS dominates SIC, which is perhaps surprising given the more recent estab-
lishment of NAICS.
Panel C shows that 10-K-based industries dominate both SIC and NAICS, as
AIC scores in panel C are broadly lower than those in either panel A or panel B.
This result is robust to scaling proﬁtability by sales or assets. The AIC score of
2,603.1 (10-K-based 300 industries) is broadly lower than the 3,091.4 for three-
digit SIC codes and the 3,097.7 for four-digit NAICS codes, even though all three
groupings have similar granularity levels.
Although we can conclude that 10-K-based industries are more informative
than SIC or NAICS industries, panel C draws only a moderately decisive conclu-
sion that the AIC scores reach a minimum at 300 industries. This minimum is
surrounded by only a gradual slope. We conclude that the degree of granularity
(roughly 300 industries) used by SIC and NAICS is reasonable and is also a good
benchmark for 10-K-based industries.
References
Antweiler, Werner, and Murray Frank. 2004. “Is All That Talk Just Noise? The In-
formation Content of Internet Stock Message Boards.” J. Finance 52:1259–94.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1997. “Automobile Prices in
Market Equilibrium.” Econometrica 63:841–90.
Bhojraj, Sanjeev, Charles Lee, and Derek Oler. 2003. “What’s My Line? A Com-
parison of Industry Classiﬁcations for Capital Market Research.” J. Accounting
Res. 41:745–74.
Chamberlin, E. H. 1933. The Theory of Monopolistic Competition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Univ. Press.
Ellickson, Paul. 2007. “Does Sutton Apply to Supermarkets?” Rand J. Econ. 38:43–59.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French. 1997. “Industry Costs of Equity.” J. Financial
Econ. 43:153–93.
Fan, Joseph, and Vidhan Goyal. 2006. “On the Patterns and Wealth Effects of
Vertical Mergers.” J. Bus. 79:877–902.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse Shapiro. 2010. “What Drives Media Slant? Evi-
dence from U.S. Daily Newspapers.” Econometrica 78:35–71.
1464
journal of political economy

Gowrisankaran, Gautam, and Marc Rysman. 2012. “Dynamics of Consumer De-
mand for New Durable Goods.” J.P.E. 120:1173–1219.
Hanley, Kathleen, and Gerard Hoberg. 2010. “The Information Content of IPO
Prospectuses.” Rev. Financial Studies 23:2821–64.
Hay, D. A. 1976. “Sequential Entry and Entry-Deterring Strategies in Spatial
Competition.” Oxford Econ. Papers 28:240–57.
Hoberg, Gerard, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2015. “Redeﬁning Financial Con-
straints: A Text-Based Analysis.” Rev. Financial Studies 28:1312–52.
Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips. 2010. “Competition and Product Market
Synergies in Mergers and Acquisitions: A Text-Based Analysis.” Rev. Financial
Studies 23:3773–3811.
———. 2013. “Industry Choice and Product Language.” Working paper, Univ.
Southern California.
Holmes, Thomas, and John Stevens. 2004. “Spatial Distribution of Economic Ac-
tivities in North America.” In Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, vol. 4, Cit-
ies and Geography, edited by J. Vernon Henderson and Jacques-François Thisse.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Hotelling, Harold. 1929. “Stability in Competition.” Econ. J. 39:41–57.
Jaffe, Adam. 1986. “Technological Opportunities and Spillovers of R&D: Evi-
dence from Firms’ Patents, Proﬁts, and Market Value.” A.E.R. 76:984–1001.
Kahle, Kathleen, and Ralph Walkling. 1996. “The Impact of Industry Classiﬁca-
tions on Financial Research.” J. Financial and Quantitative Analysis 31:309–35.
Krishnan, Jayanthi, and Eric Press. 2003. “The North American Industry Classi-
ﬁcation System and Its Implications for Accounting Research.” Contemporary
Accounting Res. 20:685–717.
Lin, Ping, and Kamal Saggi. 2002. “Product Differentiation, Process R&D, and
the Nature of Market Competition.” European Econ. Rev. 46:201–11.
Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald. 2011. “When Is a Liability Not a Liability?
Textual Analysis, Dictionaries, and 10-Ks.” J. Finance 66:35–65.
Mazzeo, Michael. 2002. “An Empirical Model of Firm Entry with Endogenous
Product Choices.” Rand J. Econ. 33:221–42.
Nevo, Aviv. 2000. “Mergers with Differentiated Products: The Case of the Ready-
to-Eat Cereal Industry.” Rand J. Econ. 31:395–421.
Panzar, J., and R. Willig. 1981. “Economies of Scope.” A.E.R. 71:268–72.
Rauh, Joshua, and Amir Suﬁ. 2012. “Explaining Corporate Capital Structure:
Product Markets, Leases, and Asset Similarity.” Rev. Finance 16:115–55.
Schmalensee, Richard. 1989. “Inter-industry Studies of Structure and Performance.”
In Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. 2, edited by Richard Schmalensee and
Robert D. Willig. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Sebastiani, Fabrizio. 2002. “Machine Learning in Automated Text Categoriza-
tion.” ACM Computing Surveys 34:1–47.
Seim, Katja. 2006. “An Empirical Model of Firm Entry with Endogenous Product
Choices.” Rand J. Econ. 37:619–40.
Shaked, Avner, and John Sutton. 1987. “Product Differentiation and Industrial
Structure.” J. Indus. Econ. 26:131–46.
Sutton, John. 1991. Sunk Costs and Market Structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tetlock, Paul C. 2007. “Giving Content to Investor Sentiment: The Role of Media
in the Stock Market.” J. Finance 62:1139–68.
Tetlock, Paul, Maytal Saar-Tsechanksy, and Sofus Macskassy. 2008. “More than
Words: Quantifying Language to Measure Firms’ Fundamentals.” J. Finance
63:1437–67.
text-based network industries
1465
